---
layout: post
title:  "The Frustrations of Driving a Car With The Engine in the Right Place"
date:   2017-06-08 23:07:00 -0700
categories: Opinion
author: "Ryan Kuhl"
---

As a past Porsche 911 owner, which I don't seem to miss an opportunity to mention, I have a slightly different outlook and expectation of a driving experience. While strange at first, I became accustomed to the engine in the back, the practice of get all your breaking done before the corner and maintain speed through the corner so you don't upset balance and end up with your ass giving the directions, accelerate just after apexing and the front of the car will bite, the diff will engage trimming the line, and the car will rocket off. This style of driving was a blast and I learned to love it. Whenever Steve would ride with me, he would always get a little uncomfortable when I was driving, odds say that's because I'm a crap driver, but he insists the way I did my cornering made him think I was going to understeer off the side of a properly tall mountain. It was just how rear engine cars drove.

Recently I've been driving a few different small roadsters, the last two being an ND clubsport MX-5 and a base Fiata 124 Spider. Though the ND had the nice high performance bits and a superior suspension tune, my experience in both cars was shockingly similar: Frustration. I hop in the drivers seat, rev the nuts off the engine and get going, preparing myself for this transcendental experience that every automotive journalist and fanboy clamours over, and here I am screaming obsceneties to myself asking why it's so twitchy and understeering in the corners! I would like to take a minute here to step back and say, as later me will find out, these cars are fantastically capable.

That being said they're not hop-in-and-go-fast cars. There's a real acclimation period to these things. The first thing to click was that my braking was all screwy, I needed to brake as little as possible and trail brake into the apex. This was a world changing realization, suddenly the understeer is gone, the nose is pointy and the body is rotating like I wanted it to. Not to say that trail braking is no good in a rear engined car, but I had heard such horror stories about messing with the car balance mid-corner that I had honestly never even attempted to do it. Never occured to me in that car. I had employed trail braking plenty of times karting, but my foot never even twitched towards depressing the brake pedal mid-corner in the 911.

The second thing that had me accepting that the problem is between the steering wheel and the seats was the difference in body control and mid-corner composure once I started making a concerted effort to be a smooth as possible. By this point it had been a few weeks since I had the opportunity to do a little spirited driving, and working off the rust was nice. Trail braking helped with smoothness, allowing the body of the vehicle to rotate around the center point rather than shoveling in extra lock on the steering wheel. This allowed me to keep my inputs positively tiny, turning the wheel no more than a couple degrees for everything but the tightest hairpin. The effect of this new-found smoothness was especially apparent in the 124 Spider due to the very soft suspension setup. The two roadsters absolutely came alive! They were darting in and out of corners with the greatest of ease.

Once I finally got these two techniques dialed in, I feel like I started to get a good look at what these cars were all about, and I must say I was very impressed. To start with the ND, the interior, although sized for a flea in the height and shoulder width areas, proved to be more comfortable than a several forms of torture for a 6'4" driver like myself. I like to explain to people who ask that it's a litte disconcerting when you have 5 contact points to your car: Hands on the steering wheel (Hoperfully), feet on the pedals (Looking at you, Tesla!), butt in the seat (gravity can be a bitch), knees in the dash (a little concerning), and crown of the head about an inch into the cloth top (calling the chirporactor now). Three of those, great, that means the car you bought actually fits you as a human being, but when you get into the 5 spectrum, it feels like more of a coffin with a gas tank, but I digress. The pedals are simply sublime, being perfectly spaced for a heel toe (that I'm still working on, thanks Turo owner!). The shifter, and I say this with all honesty, is on par with the 911s and Boxsters that I've driven. It feels so connected and dialed in; there's so little play and the engagement points and well spaced gates means that you'll never miss a shift. It's such a special feeling getting ready for a shift with the engine at redline, feeling the knob buzz like a ride cymbal on rhythm with the rest of the band. The clarity and harmony these inputs bring to the driver are sublime. That being said, I do have one gripe with the imputs: why in the absolute hell does the steering wheel not telescope?! For that matter why does it only tilt from leg-guillotine to knuckles-graze-your-knee? There's just not enough adjustability in the steering wheel to make it a comfortable car, tall people get this weird italian car driving position where your legs are all cramped upunder the dash and your arms are completely perpendicular to your shoulders. This is not a comfortable way to drive Mazda! If you're reading this, please please pleas... make a new RX-7! But also take a look at the steering wheel or whetever, but only if there's time after the next rotary engine with the fixed apex seal. Look it up.
